# 4. Tools for Transcriptomics

## Data Provided

- FASTA file
    - athal_chr.fa

- FASTQ files
    - Day8.fastq
    - Day16.fastq

- Gene annotation file (GTF)
    - athal_genes.gtf

## Instructions

For this project, it is recommended that you use the VMBox virtual environment  (***Docker instead for MacOS with M1 or M2 chips) provided with the Course package and the tools therein. You may also use your own system and software, however make sure that appropriate versions are installed. The answers are compatible with the following versions of the software: samtools v.1.2, bowtie2 v.2.2.2, tophat v.2.0.14, and cufflinks/ cuffmerge/ cuffcompare/ cuffdiff v.2.2.1. 

You are performing an RNA-seq experiment to determine genes that are differentially expressed at different stages in the development of Arabidopsis thaliana shoot apical meristem. You collected samples at day 8 and day 16 (files “Day8.fastq” and “Day16.fastq”), extracted and sequenced the cellular mRNA, and are now set to perform the bioinformatics analysis. The reference genome you will need for the analysis is “athal_chr.fa” and the reference gene annotations are in “athal_genes.gtf”. Use default parameters unless otherwise specified. Sample command files that you can modify to create your own pipeline are provided in the file “commands.tar.gz”. All files are provided in the archive gencommand_proj4.tar.gz. 

NOTE: The genome and annotation data were obtained and modified from the Arabidopsis Information Resources (TAIR) Database, and the RNA-seq reads were extracted from GenBank’s Short Read Archive (SRA). 

Create a bowtie index of the genome using bowtie2-build, with the prefix ‘athal’. Include a copy of the reference genome with the name “athal.fa” in the index directory.

### Questions 1 - 10: 

Align both RNA-seq data sets to the reference genome using tophat. Analyze the results to answer the following questions.

### Questions 11 - 20: 

Assemble the aligned RNA-seq reads into genes and transcripts using cufflinks. Use the labels ‘Day8’ and ‘Day16’, respectively, when creating identifiers. For this portion of the analysis, answer the following questions. 

### Questions 21 - 30: 

Run cuffcompare on the resulting cufflinks transcripts, using the reference gene annotations provided and selecting the option '-R' to consider only the reference transcripts that overlap some input transfrag. For this step, using the *.tmap files answer the following, for both sets. 

### Questions 31 - 35: 

Perform the differential gene expression analysis. For this, in a first stage run cuffmerge using the provided annotation to merge and reconcile the two sets of cufflinks transcripts. Make a note of the resulting file, ‘merged.gtf’. In a second step, use cufdiff to perform the differential expression analysis. 

NOTE: Note that in general at least three replicates per condition are required to establish statistical significance. The single replicate example is provided here only to illustrate the analysis.

## File Setup and Pipeline

### 1. Create FASTA Index

```
bowtie2-build athal_chr.fa athal/athal
```

### 2. Create Shell Command Files

#### com.tophat

```
DATADIR=/home/guest/Desktop/4.4/
WORKDIR=/home/guest/Desktop/4.4/Tophat
BWT2IDX=/home/guest/Desktop/4.4/athal/athal

mkdir -p $WORKDIR/Day8

tophat -o $WORKDIR/Day8 -p 10 \
        $BWT2IDX \
        $DATADIR/Day8.fastq

mkdir -p $WORKDIR/Day16

tophat -o $WORKDIR/Day16 -p 10 \
	$BWT2IDX \
	$DATADIR/Day16.fastq
```

#### com.cufflinks

```
THDIR=/home/guest/Desktop/4.4/Tophat
WORKDIR=/home/guest/Desktop/4.4/Cufflinks

mkdir -p $WORKDIR/Day8
cd $WORKDIR/Day8
cufflinks -p 8 $THDIR/Day8/accepted_hits.bam

mkdir -p $WORKDIR/Day16
cd $WORKDIR/Day16
cufflinks -p 8 $THDIR/Day16/accepted_hits.bam
```

#### com.cuffcompare

```
DATADIR=/home/guest/Desktop/4.4/Cufflinks
REFDIR=/home/guest/Desktop/4.4
WORKDIR=/home/guest/Desktop/4.4/Cuffcompare

mkdir -p $WORKDIR/Day8

cuffcompare -r $REFDIR/athal_genes.gtf \
	-R -o $WORKDIR/Day8 \
	$DATADIR/Day8/transcripts.gtf

mkdir -p $WORKDIR/Day16

cuffcompare -r $REFDIR/athal_genes.gtf \
	-R -o $WORKDIR/Day16 \
	$DATADIR/Day16/transcripts.gtf
```

#### com.cuffdiff

```
WORKDIR=/home/guest/Desktop/4.4
THDIR=/home/guest/Desktop/4.4/Tophat
ANNOT=/home/guest/Desktop/4.4/athal_genes.gtf

cuffmerge -g $ANNOT -p 8 -o $WORKDIR/Cuffmerge $WORKDIR/Cuffmerge/GTFs.txt

cuffdiff -o $WORKDIR/Cuffdiff -p 10 $WORKDIR/Cuffmerge/merged.gtf \
          $THDIR/Day8/accepted_hits.bam $THDIR/Day16/accepted_hits.bam        
```

### 3. Run the Pipeline

```
# Aligns RNA-seq reads to a reference genome, allowing for spliced alignments (reads crossing exon–exon junctions)
nohup sh com.tophat >& com.tophat.log

# Assembles transcripts from the aligned reads and estimates their expression levels (FPKM/TPM)
nohup sh com.cufflinks >& com.cufflinks.log

# Compares assembled transcripts against a reference annotation (GTF/GFF)
nohup sh com.cuffcompare >& com.cuffcompare.log

# Tests for differential expression between experimental conditions (genes, isoforms, promoters, splicing)
nohup sh com.cuffdiff >& com.cuffdiff.log
```

## Questions

### Question 1: How many alignments were produced for the ‘Day8’ RNA-seq data set?

```
more accepted_hits.bam | wc -l

63845
```

### Question 2: How many alignments were produced for the ‘Day16’ RNA-seq data set?

```
more accepted_hits.bam | wc -l

53898
```

### Question 3: How many reads were mapped in ‘Day8’ RNA-seq data set?

```
more align_summary.txt

63489
```

### Question 4: How many reads were mapped in ‘Day16’ RNA-seq data set?

```
more align_summary.txt

57951
```

### Question 5: How many reads were uniquely aligned in ‘Day8’ RNA-seq data set?

```
more align_summary.txt

63489 - 356 = 63133
```

### Question 6: How many reads were uniquely aligned in ‘Day16’ RNA-seq data set?

```
more align_summary.txt

57951 - 447 = 57504
```

### Question 7: How many spliced alignments were reported for ‘Day8’ RNA-seq data set?

```
samtools view accepted_hits.bam | cut –f6 | grep –c ‘N’

8596
```

### Question 8: How many spliced alignments were reported for ‘Day16’ RNA-seq data set?

```
samtools view accepted_hits.bam | cut –f6 | grep –c ‘N’

10695
```

### Question 9:  How many reads were left unmapped from ‘Day8’ RNA-seq data set?

```
more align_summary.txt

63489 - 63405 = 84
```

### Question 10: How many reads were left unmapped from ‘Day16’ RNA-seq data set?

```
more align_summary.txt

58398 - 58364 = 34
```

---

### Question 11: How many genes were generated by cufflinks for Day8?

```
cut –f9 transcripts.gtf | cut –d ' ' –f2 | sort –u | wc –l

186
```

### Question 12: How many genes were generated by cufflinks for Day16?

```
cut –f9 transcripts.gtf | cut –d ' ' –f2 | sort –u | wc –l

80
```

### Question 13: How many transcripts were reported for Day8?

```
cut –f9 transcripts.gtf | cut –d ' ' –f4 | sort –u | wc –l

192
```

### Question 14: How many transcripts were reported for Day16?

```
cut –f9 transcripts.gtf | cut –d ' ' –f4 | sort –u | wc –l

92
```

### Question 15: How many single transcript genes were produced for Day8?

```
cut –f9 transcripts.gtf | cut –d ' ' –f2,4 | sort –u | cut –d ' ' –f1 | sort | uniq –c | grep –c "1"

180
```

### Question 16: How many single transcript genes were produced for Day16?

```
cut –f9 transcripts.gtf | cut –d ' ' –f2,4 | sort –u | cut –d ' ' –f1 | sort | uniq –c | grep –c "1"

69
```

### Question 17: How many single-exon transcripts were in the Day8 set?

```
cut –f9 transcripts.gtf | cut –d ' ' –f4 | sort | uniq –c | grep –c "2"

119
```

### Question 18: How many single-exon transcripts were in the Day16 set?

```
cut –f9 transcripts.gtf | cut –d ' ' –f4 | sort | uniq –c | grep –c "2"

24
```

### Question 19: How many multi-exon transcripts were in the Day8 set?

```
192 - 119 = 73
```

### Question 20: How many multi-exon transcripts were in the Day16 set?

```
92 - 24 = 68
```

---

*Note: Despite running the pipeline with no errors, I was not able to generate .tmap files using cuffcompare to answer Questions 21 - 30.*

### Question 21: How many cufflinks transcripts fully reconstruct annotation transcripts in Day8?

### Question 22: How many cufflinks transcripts fully reconstruct annotation transcripts in Day16?

### Question 23: How many splice variants does the gene AT4G20240 have in the Day8 sample? 

### Question 24: How many splice variants does the gene AT4G20240 have in the Day16 sample? 

### Question 25: How many cufflinks transcripts are partial reconstructions of reference transcripts (‘contained’)? (Day8)

### Question 26: How many cufflinks transcripts are partial reconstructions of reference transcripts (‘contained’)? (Day16)

### Question 27: How many cufflinks transcripts are novel splice variants of reference genes? (Day8)

### Question 28: How many cufflinks transcripts are novel splice variants of reference genes? (Day16)

### Question 29: How many cufflinks transcripts were formed in the introns of reference genes? (Day8)

### Question 30: How many cufflinks transcripts were formed in the introns of reference genes? (Day16)

---

### Question 31: How many genes (loci) were reported in the merged.gtf file?

```
cut –f9 merged.gtf | cut –d ' ' –f2 | sort –u | wc –l

129
```

### Question 32: How many transcripts?

```
cut –f9 merged.gtf | cut –d ' ' –f4 | sort –u | wc –l

200
```

### Question 33: How many genes total were included in the gene expression report from cuffdiff?

```
wc -l gene_exp.diff

129
```

### Question 34: How many genes were detected as differentially expressed?

```
grep -c yes gene_exp.diff

4
```

### Question 35: How many transcripts were differentially expressed between the two samples?

```
grep -c yes isoform_exp.diff

5
```
